# The new economics of politics
## The rise of the fringe party

Fringe parties are on the rise, especially in Europe: AfD, Front National, Syriza, UKIP and friends have seen large popularity gains around the continent and in some cases have overtaken well established parties. In the United States, candidates still operate in the two party system, but the parties are increasingly fragmented into smaller groups with different opinions, all with their own voter base, donors, campaign staff, etc. The trend is echoed in other democratic countries, too. Indian politics is increasingly driven by Hindu nationalists for instance. While it is often seen as a right wing phenomenon, it is by no means restricted to it. There are now several left wing, pro environment and liberal niche groups within the democratic party in the U.S. for instance. All that those new niche groups have in common is being vocal, more or less populist, and equipped with a set of radical, sometimes even impossible ideas. Political commentators usually regard this as a new and mysterious issue, seeking explanations in [economic decline, immigration and identity crisis, the decline of traditional news outlets, and occasionally Russian interference](https://www.theguardian.com/world/political-science/2018/nov/20/why-is-populism-suddenly-so-sexy-the-reasons-are-many). From an economic and marketing perspective, the rise of the fringe is neither new nor unexpected. Similar changes have been observed in other markets, from music to books to razors. Politics can learn from the insights generated.

## The guillette dilemma: The shifting advantage of distribution

Before 2011, the razor business was a simple one. Razors were sold in supermarkets. To sell any razor, you had to go to a big supermarket chain, like Walmart or Aldi, and convince them to stock your products. For this, you usually had to be able to A) pay a stocking fee and B) convince the supermarket that you would be able to deliver all those razors in time. This meant that to be able to sell any razor, you had to be able to produce millions of razors, at a low enough cost to not go bankrupt. Once your razor was in the shelves, you still had to market it. To this end, you would buy TV, radio and newspaper ads. There were only so many media outlets, and all of those had a few "prime time" advertising slots, such as around big football games. Those prime time slots would cost millions and reach pretty much everyone. There was no way to reach a specific audience, you had to either reach everyone or reach nobody. To be in the razor business, you needed a large advertising budget, large production capabilities and established relationships with retailers. Once you had those in place however, life was easy. There are only so many shelves in a supermarket, so once you had bought the shelf space, customers had only one choice. There are only so many prime time slots, so once you had bought those, most customers would only know you. Having the ability to market, deliver and sell your product is called distribution. And in some businesses, it was all that mattered. If you had a competitor whose razors were much cheaper than yours, nobody would buy them because nobody knew them and they were not even on supermarket shelves. Most people would use the same razors, not because one company excelled so much at making them, but because not many companies could sell razors in the first place.

Then in 2011, a company called "Dollar Shave Club" (DSC) was founded. Its innovation was trifold: First, it does not sell in supermarkets, but online. Second, it does not market on prime time TV, [but with a viral YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZUG9qYTJMsI). Third, it sold razors in a subscription model, thus binding its customers. For established razor makers, this was pretty scary. Their distribution capabilities, that had guaranteed them an oligopoly, were now worthless. 

## How to run a 21st century party